>> Brown: TRADE, SECURITY AND
IMMIGRATION TOPPED THE AGENDA,
AS PRESIDENT OBAMA KICKED OFF A
THREE-DAY SWING THROUGH MEXICO
AND COSTA RICA.
GOOD EVENING, I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Woodruff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
ON THE "NEWSHOUR" TONIGHT, WE
EXAMINE THE STATE OF U.S.-MEXICO
RELATIONS AS MR. OBAMA MEETS
WITH MEXICAN PRESIDENT ENRIQUE
PENA NIETO.
>> Brown: THEN, WE LOOK AT THE
FIGHT OVER ACCESS TO THE MORNING
AFTER PILL.
A FEDERAL JUDGE HAD RULED IT
SHOULD BE AVAILABLE OVER-THE-
COUNTER TO WOMEN AND GIRLS OF
ALL AGES.
BUT THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION IS
NOW APPEALING THAT DECISION.
>> Woodruff: RAY SUAREZ REPORTS
ON IRAQ'S BLOODY APRIL WITH
BOMBS AND OTHER ATTACKS KILLING
MORE THAN 700 PEOPLE, RAISING
FEARS OF A SECTARIAN CIVIL WAR.
>> Brown: WE TALK TO GOOGLE'S
ERIC SCHMIDT AND JARED COHEN
ABOUT THE INTERSECTION OF
TECHNOLOGY AND DEMOCRACY AND THE
PROMISE AND PITFALLS OF THE NEW
DIGITAL AGE.
>> PRIVACY BECOMES MORE
IMPORTANT IN THIS NEW
INTERCONNECTED WORLD BECAUSE WE
NEED PRIVACY, WE ALL-- EVERYONE
WANTS IT AND I THINK YOU'RE
GOING TO HAVE TO FIGHT FOR IT.
>> Woodruff: AND WE CLOSE WITH A
SURPRISING ARCHEOLOGICAL FIND IN
JAMESTOWN THAT TELLS A BLEAK
STORY OF THE EARLY COLONISTS'
STRUGGLE WITH STARVATION.
>> FROM MY EXPERIENCE WORKING
WITH PREHISTORIC SKELETONS, THIS
IS ABSOLUTELY CONSISTENT WITH
WHAT WE SEE WITH CANNIBALISM AND
THE TYOSPE OF CASES.
>> Brown: THAT'S ALL AHEAD.
ON TONIGHT'S "NEWSHOUR."
>> Woodruff: PRESIDENT OBAMA
ARRIVED IN MEXICO CITY THIS
AFTERNOON TO SHORE UP THE U.S.
RELATIONSHIP WITH ITS SOUTHERN
NEIGHBOR AND SECOND LARGEST
EXPORT MARKET.
IMMIGRATION AND SECURITY ARE
ALSO ON THE AGENDA AS THE
PRESIDENT BEGINS HIS THREE-DAY
LATIN AMERICAN TRIP.
SHORTLY AFTER AIR FORCE ONE
TOUCHED DOWN IN MEXICO CITY THIS
AFTERNOON, MR. OBAMA JOINED
MEXICO'S NEW PRESIDENT ENRIQUE
PENA NIETO.
LATER, AT A JOINT PRESS
CONFERENCE, THE PRESIDENT
STRESSED THE IMPORTANCE OF THE
COUNTRIES' RELATIONSHIP.
>> WE CAN'T LOSE SIGHT OF THE
LARGER RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN OUR
PEOPLES, INCLUDING THE PROMISE
OF MEXICO'S ECONOMIC PROGRESS.
I BELIEVE WE'VE GOT A HISTORIC
OPPORTUNITY TO FOSTER EVEN MORE
COOPERATION, MORE TRADE, MORE
JOBS ON BOTH SIDES OF THE
BORDER, AND THAT'S THE FOCUS OF
MY VISIT.
>> Woodruff: U.S. IMMIGRATION
REFORM WILL BE A CENTRAL PIECE
OF THEIR AGENDA.
PRESIDENT OBAMA WANTS CONGRESS
TO APPROVE A PLAN THAT WOULD
PROVIDE VISAS FOR SEASONAL
WORKERS, AS WELL AS A PATHWAY TO
CITIZENSHIP FOR THE 11 MILLION
PEOPLE NOW LIVING IN THE U.S.
ILLEGALLY.
MORE THAN HALF ARE FROM MEXICO,
ACCORDING TO THE PEW RESEARCH
CENTER.
AT A NOVEMBER VISIT IN
WASHINGTON THEN PRESIDENT-ELECT
PENA NIETO VOICED SUPPORT FOR
THOSE PROPOSALS.
BUT A KEY ISSUE FOR REPUBLICANS
IS STEPPED-UP SECURITY ALONG THE
2,000 MILE SHARED BORDER WITH
MEXICO AND A STOP TO THE FLOW OF
DRUGS, GUNS AND CRIME.
IN THE SIX-YEAR DRUG WAR WAGED
BY FELIPE CALDERON, PENA NIETO'S
PREDECESSOR, MEXICO SAW MORE
THAN 60,000 DRUG-RELATED
HOMICIDES.
PENA NIETO CAMPAIGNED ON A
PROMISE TO END THAT VIOLENCE,
AND IN APRIL HIS GOVERNMENT
CLAIMED THAT KILLINGS HAD
DROPPED 17% IN THE NEW
PRESIDENT'S FIRST FOUR MONTHS IN
OFFICE.
PENA NIETO HAS ALSO MOVED TO
TAKE MORE CONTROL OF HIS
COUNTRY'S FIGHT AGAINST THE DRUG
CARTELS.
ON MONDAY HIS GOVERNMENT
CONFIRMED THAT ALL SECUTYRI
DECISIONS WOULD NOW RUN THROUGH
THE INTERIOR MINISTRY, ENDING
YEARS OF WIDESPREAD, DIRECT
ACCESS BY U.S. AGENCIES, LIKE
THE C.I.A., TO THEIR MEXICAN
EQUIVALENTS.
MR. OBAMA WAS ASKED ABOUT THE
DECISION DURING A PRESS
CONFERENCE THE NEXT DAY.
>> I'M NOT GOING TO YET JUDGE
HOW THIS WILL ALTER THE
RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN THE UNITED
STATES AND MEXICO UNTIL I'VE
HEARD DIRECTLY FROM TM TOHE SEE
WHAT EXACTLY ARE THEY TRYING TO
ACCOMPLISH.
BUT OVERALL, WHAT I CAN SAY IS
>> Woodruff: BOTH PRESIDENTS ARE
EAGER TO STRESS THE IMPORTANCE
OF ECONOMIC TIES ON THIS TRIP.
MEXICO IS AMERICA'S SECOND
LARGEST EXPORT MARKET, AND
TOGETHER THE COUNTRIES DO MORE
THAN A BILLION DOLLARS IN TRADE
EACH DAY.
LAST YEAR THE MEXICAN ECONOMY
GREW BY ALMOST 4%, AND PENA
NIETO HAS PLANNED AMBITIOUS
REFORMS FOR HIS SIX-YEAR TERM.
TOMORROW PRESIDENT OBAMA WILL
ADDRESS MEXICAN ENTREPRENEURS
BEFORE HEADING ON TO COSTA RICA.
JOINING ME NOW TO TALK ABOUT THE
PRESIDENT'S VISIT AND THE U.S./
MEXICO RELATIONSHIP IS SHANNON
O'NEILL, A SENIOR FELLOW AT THE
COUNCIL ON FOREIGN RELATIONS AND
AUTHOR OF "TWO NATIONS
INDIVISIBLE: MEXICO, THE UNITED
STATES AND THE ROAD AHEAD."
AND DIANA NEGROPONTE, A SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE BROOKINGS
INSTITUTE.
WELCOME TO YOU BOTH.
DIANA NEGROPONTE, TO YOU FIRST.
SO PENA NIETO HAS ONLY BEEN IN
OFFICE A FEW MONTHS.
WHY WAS THIS MEETING SCHEDULED
SO EARLY IN HIS TIME?
IT'S IMPORTANT FOR MEXICO TO
CONSOLIDATE A GOOD RELATIONSHIP
WITH THE U.S. PRESIDENT, SO
COMING THIS EARLY-- AND,
REMEMBER, THEY MET BEFORE PENA
NIETO TOOK THE OATH OF OFFICE,
SO THEY'VE MET IN NOVEMBER--
CONSOLIDATES A PERSONAL
RELATIONSHIP, WE HOPE GL SHANNON
O'NEILL, HOW DIFFERENTLY DOES--
JUST PICKING UP ON WHAT DIANA
NEGROPONTE JUST SAID, HOW
DIFFERENTLY DOES THIS
ADMINISTRATION SEE PENA NIETO
FROM THE WAY IT SAW HIS
PREDECESSORS?
>> WELL, PENA NIETO HAS COME IN
WITH A BIG ECONOMIC AGENDA, AND
HE HAS VERY AMBITIOUS REFORMS ON
THE PLATE, AND SOME OF THEM HE'S
ALREADY PASSED.
HE'S PASSED A LABOR REFORM,
EDUCATION REFORM,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS REFORM, AND
HE'S TALKING ABOUT ENERGY AND
TAX REFORM.
AND THIS IS DIFFERENT FROM HIS
PREDECESSOR, WHO HAD A HARD
TIME, PARTICULARLY GETTING THESE
ISSUES THROUGH.
THAT'S SOMETHING THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION WANTS TO WORK
WITH.
WE'VE ALREADY SEEN AS YOU
MENTIONED CHANGES ON THE
SECURITY SIDE, AN EVOLUTION IN
THE WAY THE U.S. AND MEXICO WILL
WORK TOGETHER IN SECURITY
SITUATIONS, MORE CENTRALIZED
FLOWS OF INFORMATION, WHICH WILL
CHANGE SOME OF THE DAY-TO-DAY
OPERATIONS.
>> Woodruff: PICKING UP ON THE
ECONOMY, WHAT CAN COME OUT OF
THIS MEET, DIANA NEGROPONTE,
THAT WOULD MAKE THINGS BETTER?
>> I WOULD HOPE THAT THEY COULD
REACH SOME PRIVATE-PUBLIC
PARTNERSHIPS TO BUILD ACCESS
ROADS ON THE BORDER.
NOW, THE BORDER MATTERS TO
TRADE.
THE BORDER SEES TRUCKS AND
VEGETABLES PASSING THROUGH EACH
DAY, AS WELL AS HUMAN BEINGS.
BUT THE LOGJAM, THE BOTTLENECK
IS VERY BAD.
SO IF WE CAN BUILD WITH PRIVATE
MONEY AND PUBLIC LICENSES SOME
GOOD ACCESS ROAD WE'RE GOING TO
FACILITATE TRADE.
>> Woodruff: YOU MEAN, IT'S
TOUGH BECAUSE OF THE IMMIGRATION
ISSUES?
>> IT'S TOUGH BECAUSE EACH OF
THOSE TRUCKS WILL BE EXAMINED BY
THE C.B.P., THE CUSTOMS AND
BORDER PATROL.
SO THAT CREATES BOTTLENECKS,
EVEN THOUGH THERE ARE 53 POINT
OF ENTRY.
THE VOLUME OF TRADE HAS
QUADRUPLE.
WE HAVEN'T OPENED ENOUGH BORDER
CROSSINGS.
WE NEED PRIVATE INVESTMENT NOW.
>> Woodruff: AND PICKING UP ON
THAT AND PICKING UP ON THE
IMMIGRATION POINT, SHANNON
O'NEILL, WE'VE SEEN REPORTS IN
THE LAST FEW DAYS, THAT
PRESIDENT OBAMA SEEING THAT
THERE'S MORE OPPOSITION TO
IMMIGRATION REFORM, THERE MAY
NOT BE AS MANY UNDOCUMENTED
IMMIGRANT IN THIS COUNTRY WHO--
FOR WHOM THERE WILL BE A PATHWAY
TO CITIZENSHIP.
HOW MUCH IS THAT ON THE AGENDA
OF THE THESE TWO PRESIDENTS?
>> WELL, THEY WILL BE TALKING
ABOUT THIS BECAUSE IT'S AN
INCREDIBLY IMPORTANT ISSUE FOR
MEXICO.
MEXICO HAS SOME 11 MILLION
CITIZENS LIVING IN THE UNITED
STATES, ROIFL SIX MILLION OF
THOSE HERE WITHOUT PAPERS,
UNDOCUMENTED.
AND THEY CARE.
THEY HOPE TO IMPROVE THE RIGHTS
AND ABILITIES OF THEIR CITIZENS
HERE BUT I DON'T SEE THE MEXICAN
GOVERNMENT WAIT WADING INTO THE
POLITICS HERE.
THEY'VE SEEN BEFORE THE FAILURES
OF BIG, COMPREHENSIVE
IMMIGRATION REFORMS, AND
INVESTIGATE MEXICAN GOVERNMENT,
OR ANY FOREIGN GOVERNMENT STEP,
IN WHAT IS OFTEN SEEN AS A
DOMESTIC POLICY ISSUE.
WE WON'T SEE ANY BIG PUBLIC
ANNOUNCEMENTS ON IT.
>> Woodruff: DO YOU SEE THEM,
DIANA NEGROPONTE, STANDING BACK
AND WATCHING WITH INTEREST?
>> THEY WATCH VERY CLOSELY.
THEY FOLLOW OUR IMGRIEGZ DEBATE
IN DETAIL, BUT THEY DO NOT WANT
TO INTERFERE BECAUSE THEY HAVE,
AS A PRINCIPLE, A CONCEPT OF
SOVEREIGN, NONINTERFERENCE.
SO WE SHOULD NOT INTERFERE IN
THEIR ENERGY DEBATE.
>> Woodruff: WELL LET ME ASK
YOU ABOUT THE QUESTION OF
SECURITY AS WE MENTIONED IN THE
SETUP PIECE JUST A FEW MINUTE
AGO.
THIS NEW PRESIDENT, PENA NIETO,
CHANGING THE WAY THE TWO
COUNTRIES WILL BE DEALING WITH
EACH OTHER WHEN IT COMES TO THE
DRUG WAR, TRYING TO CENTRALIZE
WHERE ALL THE INFORMATION GOES.
HOW MUCH OF A DIFFERENT DOES
THAT PORTEND TO BE?
>> WE'VE HAD A VERY INTENSE,
CLOSE COLLABORATION WITH THE
MEXICAN GOVERNMENT OVER THE LAST
SIX YEARS.
INDEED, NEVER HAS THERE BEEN
SUPA CLOSE COLLABORATION BETWEEN
THE TWO NEIGHBORING GOVERNMENTS.
SO THERE'S ROOM TO DISENGAGE
SOMEWHAT.
A CONCERN FOR US IS HOW THE NEW
SECURITY SYSTEM DEVELOPS.
WILL WE BE CAN THED?
WHAT IS THE NAME OF THE DIALOGUE
BETWEEN THE TWO GOVERNMENTS AS
MEXICO SHIFTS THE SECURITY
STRATEGY?
>> Woodruff: SHANNON O'NEILL,
HOW DO YOU SEE THAT?
WHAT DO YOU SEE CHANGING ON THE
PART OF THE MEXICANS, AND HOW DO
YOU SEE THIS ADMINISTRATION
RESPONDING TO IT?
>> WELL, ONE OF THE CRITICISMS
OF THE DEEPENING OVER THE LAST--
THE LAST PRESIDENTS, THE LAST
SIX YEARS, HAS BEEN OFTEN THE
SHARING OF INFORMATION WAS
FRAGMENTED, IT WAS
DECENTRALIZED.
SO AGENCIES WERE TALKING TO
AGENTS, AND EVEN AGTSEN WERE
TALKING TO PARTICULAR AGENTS.
THE BIG STRATEGIC SECURITY PLAN,
NATIONALLY IN MEXICO OR
BINATIONALLY, SOMETIMES
FALTERED.
INFORMATION WASN'T SHARED.
YOU COULDN'T SEE REALLY WHAT WAS
HAPPENING.
SO IN PART THIS CENTRALIZATION
OF INFORMATION FLOWS WILL BE
GOOD TO HAVE A CLEARING HOUSE
WHERE IT'S A BIT CLEARER WHAT'S
COMING AND WHAT'S GOING.
BUT THE CHALLENGE WILL BE SOME
OF THE INFORMATION WE'VE SEEN
SHARED, REALLY FOR THE FIRST
TIME IN THE LAST SELF YEARS, IS
QUITE SENSITIVE.
IT'S ABOUT ACTIVE CASES AND
TRACKING DOWN KINGPINS.
AND HERE YOU MAY SEE RETICENCE,
OR CAUTION ON THE U.S. SIDE FOR
SHARING VERY SENSITIVE
INFORMATION.
THEY MIGHT DO IT WITH SOMEBODY
THEY HAVE BEEN WORKING WITH HAND
IN HAND AND WHO THEY TRUST.
BUT WILL THEY SEND IT TO A
BUREAUCRACY IN MEXICO CITY?
THAT'S A CONCERN.
>> Woodruff: IS THERE A
CONCERN ON THE U.S. PART THAT
THE WAR EFFORT COULD BE WEAKENED
CONSIDERABLY BECAUSE OF THIS NEW
SYSTEM?
>> PRESIDENT PENA NIETO TOLD US
BEFORE THAT HE WOULD FOCUS MORE
ON PROTECTING MEXICAN CITIZENS
THAN GOING AFTER DRUG KINGED
PINS.
SO WE KNOW THAT THERE'S GOING TO
BE A SHIFT TOWARDS THE INTERIOR
OF THE COUNTRY, KEEPING MEXICANS
SAFE FROM EXTORTION, KIDNAPPING,
CAR ROBBERY.
THAT WE UNDERSTAND.
BUT HOW YOU MOVE TOWARDS THAT,
THE PROCESS ITSELF IS THAT IS IN
NEGOTIATION OR DISCUSSION NOW.
>> Woodruff: WHEN WERE YOU
GOING TO SAY, SHANNON?
>> I WAS GOING TO SAY SECURITY
IN MEXICO IN THE END IS REALLY
UP TO MEXICO.
AND THERE ARE THINGS THAT MEXICO
WOULD LIKE TO DO AND THAT THE
UNITED STATES CAN HELP THEM
WITH.
AND THOSE ARE THINGS LIKE
HELPING WITH THE TRANSFORMATION
OF THE JUSTICE SYSTEM, CHANGING
THE WAY THE COURT SYSTEM WORKS.
THE OTHER THINGS THEY CAN DO IS
HELP CLEAN UP THE POLICE FORCES,
MAKE THEM MORE PROFESSIONAL AS
WELL AS BEGIN TO EXPAND THE
SOCIOECONOMIC PROGRAMS THAT HELP
YOUTH AT RISK OR COMMUNITIES AT
RISK.
IN THE END, THIS IS REALLY
MEXICO'S PROBLEM.
WE CAN HELP THEM AND WE WILL BUT
IN THE END IT'S THEIR
RESPONSIBILITY.
SO THIS GOVERNMENT IS TAKEOK
THAT RESPONSIBILITY AND
PRESUMABLY DOING WHAT THEY THINK
NEEDS TO BE DONE GIVEN HOW
DIFFICULT THE LEVELS OF VIOLENCE
STILL REMAIN.
>> Woodruff: AND, OF COURSE,
MEXICO CONTINUING TO LOOK TO THE
U.S. AND SAY, "YOU ARE THE ONES
WHO ARE THE MAIN MARKET FOR
THESE ILLEGAL DRUGS."
SHANNON O'NEILL AND DIANA
NEGROPONTE, WE THANK YOU BOTH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: STILL TO COME ON THE
"NEWSHOUR": THE FIGHT OVER
ACCESS TO THE MORNING-AFTER
PILL; IRAQ'S DEADLIEST MONTH IN
YEARS; GOOGLE'S SCHMIDT AND
COHEN ON "THE NEW DIGITAL AGE"
DAYS IN JAMESTOWN.
BUT FIRST, THE OTHER NEWS OF THE
DAY.
HERE'S KWAME HOLMAN.
>> Holman: PRESIDENT OBAMA
NEARLY ROUNDED OUT HIS SECOND-
TERM CABINET TODAY MAKING TWO
NOMINATIONS TO HIS ECONOMIC
TEAM.
THE PRESIDENT CHOSE ONE OF HIS
LONGTIME FUNDRAISERS BILLIONAIRE
PHILANTHROPIST PENNY PRITZKER TO
LEAD THE COMMERCE DEPARTMENT.
AND HE TAPPED CURRENT ECONOMIC
ADVISER MICHAEL FROMAN TO BE THE
NEXT U.S. TRADE REPRESENTATIVE.
FROMAN IS A FORMER EXECUTIVE AT
CITIGROUP.
MR.OBAMA MADE THE ANNOUNCEMENTS
IN THE WHITE HOUSE ROSE GARDEN.
>> I'VE HAD A CHANCE TO GET TO
KNOW PENNY AND MIKE NOT JUST AS
LEADERS AND PROFESSIONALS BUT
ALSO AS FRIENDS.
ONE OF THE REASONS I'M PROUD TO
NOMINATE THEM IS THEY DON'T
FORGET WHAT MATTERS.
THEY KNOW THIS IS NOT ABOUT JUST
GROWING BALANCE SHEETS.
IT'S ABOUT GROWING OPPORTUNITY
FOR PEOPLE.
IT'S ABOUT GROWING A SENSE OF
SECURITY FOR THE MIDDLE CLASS.
AND MOST OF ALL THEY OPERATE
WITH INTEGRITY AND THEY
UNDERSTAND THAT PUBLIC SERVICE
IS A PRIVILEGE.
>> Holman: BOTH NOMINEES ARE
PREDICTED TO HAVE EASY SENATE
CONFIRMATIONS.
ONE FINAL CABINET NOMINATION
REMAINS TO LEAD THE SMALL
BUSINESS ADMINISTRATION.
THERE WERE REPORTS OUT OF SYRIA
TODAY THAT 50 TO 100 PEOPLE,
INCLUDING WOMEN AND CHILDREN,
WERE KILLED BY GOVERNMENT TROOPS
AND GUNMEN.
THE BRITISH BASED SYRIAN
OBSERVATORY FOR HUMAN RIGHTS
SAID PRESIDENT ASSAD'S FORCES
TOOK OVER A VILLAGE NEAR THE
MEDITERRANEAN COAST.
MANY REPORTEDLY WERE EXECUTED BY
GUNFIRE OR KNIVES.
PEOPLE WHO FLED SAID OTHER
BODIES WERE FOUND BURNED.
A NORTH KOREAN COURT SENTENCED
AN AMERICAN CITIZEN TO 15 YEARS
HARD LABOR FOR WHAT IT SAID WERE
CRIMES AGAINST THE STATE.
THE U.S. STATE DEPARTMENT
SWIFTLY CALLED FOR AMNESTY FOR
44-YEAR OLD KENNETH BAE.
WE HAVE A REPORT NARRATED BY
JOHN SPARKS OF "INDEPENDENT
TELEVISION NEWS."
>> Reporter: HERE'S WHAT WE DO
KNOW ABOUT KENNETH BAE.
HE'S AN AMERICAN CITIZEN, A
DEVOUT CHRISTIAN AND HE'S BEEN
SENTENCED TO 15 YEARS HARD LABOR
IN A NORTH KOREAN WORK CAMP.
STILL FURTHER DETAILS ARE HARDER
TO COME BY.
MR. BAE WAS CONVICTED OF HOSTILE
ACTS IN THE COUNTRY'S TOP COURT,
BUT THE REGIME HASN'T PROVIDED
INFORMATION ON THE PROCEEDINGS
OR DETAILS OF THE CRIMES.
HE WAS ARRESTED LAST NOVEMBER IN
RASONG-- A SPECIAL ECONOMIC ZONE
ON THE BORDER WITH CHINA
MR. BAE, WAS LEADING A TOUR
GROUP AT THE TIME, BUT IT'S
THOUGHT HIS INTEREST IN
ASSISTING NORTH KOREAN ORPHANS
MAY HAVE GOT HIM TROUBLE.
THERE IS ANOTHER EXPLANATION FOR
HIS SENTENCE.
MR. BAE IS NOT THE FIRST
AMERICAN TO BE ARRESTED FOR
HOSTILE ACTS.
AND IN RECENT YEARS, DIGNITARIES
LIKE FORMER PRESIDENTS CARTER CP
TO WIN THEIR RELEASE.
BILL CLINTON HELPED FREE TWO
U.S. JOURNALISTS IN 2009.
>> WHEN WE WALKED THROUGH THE
DOORS WE SAW STANDING BEFORE US
PRESIDENT BILL CLINTON.
( APPLAUSE )
>> Reporter: BUT THESE VISITS
ARE ORCHESTRATED SAY CRITICS, BY
A REGIME DESPERATE FOR AID AND
ASSISTANCE.
>> Holman: A STATE DEPARTMENT
SPOKESMAN SAID TODAY THE U.S. IS
STILL TRYING TO LEARN THE FACTS
OF BAE'S CASE.
NO ONE FROM THE SWEDISH EMBASSY
IN PYONGYANG, WHICH HANDLES
CONSULAR MATTERS IN NORTH KOREA
FOR THE U.S. WAS AT THE LEGAL
PROCEEDING TODAY.
THE NUMBER OF DEATHS FROM THE
COLLAPSE OF A GARMENT FACTORY IN
BANGLADESH ROSE TO 433 TODAY.
RELATIVES OF THE MISSING
SEARCHED FOR THE REMAINS OF
THEIR LOVED ONES AS BODIES WERE
LAID OUT FOR IDENTIFICATION.
POLICE REPORTED 149 PEOPLE STILL
ARE MISSING.
IT'S THE WORST DISASTER IN
BANGLADESH'S GARMENT INDUSTRY
WORTH AN ESTIMATED $20 BILLION A
YEAR.
A WILDFIRE THREATENED HOMEANDS
A UNIVERSITY CAMPUS IN SOUTHERN
CALIFORNIA TODAY.
IT ERUPTED THIS MORNING NEAR
CAMARILLO 50 MILES WEST OF LOS
ANGELES.
GUSTY SANTA ANA WINDS MADE THE
FIRE HARD TO CONTROL AS IT RACED
ALONG THE U.S. 101 FREEWAY.
500 FIREFIGHTERS WERE BATTLING
THE BLAZE BUT IT REMAINED
UNCONTAINED.
THE U.N.'S ANNUAL CLIMATE REPORT
SHOWS LAST YEAR WAS THE NINTH
HOTTEST SINCE RECORDS STARTED IN
1850.
AND THAT WAS IN SPITE OF THE
COOLING EFFECT OF THE WEATHER
PATTERN LA NINA.
2012 ALSO MARKED THE 27TH
STRAIGHT YEAR IN WHICH THE
GLOBAL AVERAGE TEMPERATURE
SURPASSED 58 DEGREES FAHRENHEIT
THE AVERAGE OF ALL THE YEARS
FROM 1961 TO 1990.
STOCKS ON WALL STREET ROSE TODAY
AS THE EUROPEAN CENTRAL BANK CUT
ITS KEY INTEREST RATE AND
AMERICAN JOBLESS CLAIMS FELL.
THE DOW JONES INDUSTRIAL AVERAGE
GAINED MORE THAN 130 POINTS TO
CLOSE AT 14,831.
THE NASDAQ ROSE 41 POINTS TO
CLOSE ABOVE 3,340.
THOSE ARE SOME OF THE DAY'S
MAJOR STORIES.
NOW, BACK TO JEFF.
>> Brown: AND WE RETURN TO THE
BATTLE OVER EMERGENCY
CONTRACEPTION, THE SO-CALLED
"MORNING AFTER" PILL.
IT'S BEEN MORE THAN A DECADE
SINCE THE PILL WAS FIRST
APPROVED BY THE F.D.A.,
BUT LEGAL AND POLICALIT
CONTROVERSY HAS SWIRLED EVER
SINCE.
IN 2011 THE F.D.A. DECIDED THE
DRUG SHOULD BE AVAILABLE TO ALL
GIRLS AND WOMEN, WITHOUT
PRESCRIPTION.
IN AN UNPRECEDENTED ACTION,
HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES
SECRETARY KATHLEEN SEBELIUS
QUICKLY OVERRULED THE AGENCY,
KEEPING THE AGE LIMIT AT 17 AND
OLDER.
LAST MONTH, A FEDERAL JUDGE
ORDERED THAT RESTRICTION LIFTED
IN A STRONG REBUKE TO THE
ADMINISTRATION.
THEN ON TUESDAY, THE F.D.A. SET
A NEW AGE LIMIT 15 AND OLDER FOR
THE MOST POPULAR VERSION OF THE
PILL, KNOWN AS "PLAN B ONE
STEP."
AND LAST NIGHT, THE DEPARTMENT
OF JUSTICE SAID IT WILL FIGHT
THE FEDERAL JUDGE'S BROADER
DECISION THAT THE DRUG SHOULD BE
AVAILABLE TO ALL GIRLS AND
WOMEN.
JULIE ROVNER OF N.P.R. IS HERE
TO HELP SORT IT ALL OUT.
AND I HOPE YOU WILL, BECAUSE
IT'S COMPLICATED.
WELCOME BACK.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brown: FIRST THE LATEST
DECISION FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF
JUSTIE, ACPPEALING THE RULING BY
THE JUDGE.
WHY?
WHAT ARE THEY SAYING?
>> WELL, THIS IS MORE OF A
PROCESS APPEAL NOT SO MUCH A
SUBSTANCE APPEAL.
THEY'RE SAYING THE JUDGE
OVERSTEPPED HIS ABILITIES, THAT
THIS HAS MORE TO DO WITH THE WAY
THE F.D.A. DOES ITS APPROVAL OF
DRUGS AND THAT HE REALLY-- THE
JUDGE REALLY DIDN'T HAVE THE
AUTHORITY TO ORDER ALL DRUGS,
THAT THIS WAS REALLY SIMPLY
ABOUT THIS ONE DRUG THE PLAN B
ONE STEP, AND THAT REALLY-- HE
WAS NOT ABLE TO DO WHAT IT IS
THAT HE'S TRYING TO DO, WHICH IS
ORDER ALL EMERGENCY
CONTRACEPTIVES TO BE MADE
AVAILABLE OVER THE COUNTER TO
WOMEN OF ALL AGES.
>> Brown: NOT ONLY DID HE DO
THAT, HE DID IT IN A VERY
FORCEFUL WAY, A PUT-DOWN AGAINST
THE ADMINISTRATION.
>> HE DID, INDEED.
THIS HAS BEEN GOING ON SINCE
2005.
THIS JUDGE HAS HAD THIS CASE
BEFORE THROUGH TWO MRPGZS NOW,
AND HE SAID-- HE HAD STRONGLY
REBUKED THE BUSH ADMINISTRATION
BEFORE, AND THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION NOW FOR REALLY
SITTING ON THIS ISSUE.
>> Brown: OKAY, NOW, IN THE
MEANTIME THIS WEEK, ALSO, THE
F.D.A. COMES OUT WITH YET A NEW
PLAN, A SORT OF COMPROMISE?
WHAT ARE THEY DOING?
>> YOU KNOW, THEY HAD THIS HAD
NOTHING TO DO WITH THE JUDGE'S
ORDER BUT IT'S REALLY HARD TO
SQUARE THAT WITH THE FACT THAT
THEY HAD BEEN SITTING ON THIS
DRUG APPLICATION FROM THE
PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY,
TIVA PHARMACEUTICAL, SINCE 2011,
AND YET IT COMES FOUR DAYS
BEFORE THE DEADLINE TO ACT.
AND IT DID, AS YOU MENTIONED,
REDUCE THE AGE OF-- FOR PEOPLE
WHO DO HAVE TO HAVE A
PRESCRIPTION DOWN TO 14,
BASICALLY, SO PEOPLE-- WOMEN 15
AND UP COULD GET IT WITHOUT A
PRESCRIPTION.
SOMETHING VERY IMPORTANT,
THOUGH, THAT WOULD CHANGE ALSO
UNDER WHAT THE F.D.A. DID BEFORE
BECAUSE THERE WAS THIS SPLIT
RULE WHERE SOME PEOPLE HAD TO
HAVE A PRESCRIPTION AND SOME
DIDN'T.
YOU HAD TO GET THE PRODUCT FROM
BEHIND THE PHARMACY COUNTER.
YOU HAD TO GO AND ASK SOMEONE AT
THE PHARMACY, EITHER THE
PHARMACIST OR PHARMACY CLERK
WHICH MEANT YOU COULD ONLY GET
IT WHEN THE PHARMACY WAS OPEN,
YOU HAD TO ON SHOW I.D.s.
AND NOW THEY'RE SAYING YOU CAN
GET IT ON THE SHELVES OF THE
PHARMACIES.
YOU WILL BE ABLE TO GET IT AT A
TARGET, WAL-MART, OR GROCERY
STORE THAT HAS A PHARMACY.
THAT WILL MAKE IT MORE
AVAILABLE.
BUT STILL, YOU'LL HAVE TO SHOW
IESM D. TO A CASHIER.
THERE WILL BE LITERALLY A CHIP
EMBEDDED, WHEN YOU GO TO RING IT
UP, IT WILL TELL THE CASHER
I.D. MUST BE SHOWN AND YOU MUST
BE 15 OR OVER.
>> Brown: AS WE HEARD IN
JUDY'S SEGMENT.
THE PRESIDENT IT IN MEXICO AND
HE'S SPEAK RIGHT NOW TAY PRESS
CONFERENCE AND I'M JUST SEEING
HE WAS ASKED ABOUT THIS AND HE
SAID, "I'M COMFORTABLE WITH THE
F.D.A. DECISION ALLOWING GIRLS
15 AND UP TO BUY THE PILL."
THAT'S AN INTERESTING QUESTION
BECAUSE IT'S NOT QUITE CLEAR,
THE F.D.A. SOEVER HERE, THE
DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE IS OVER
HERE, THE ADMISTRANITION IS OVER
HERE.
>> WELL, THAT'S NOT REALLY A
SURPRISE BECAUSE, REMEMBER, WHEN
THE F.D.A. WANTED TO TAKE OFF
ALL THE AGE RESTRICTIONS THEY
WERE OVERRULED BY SECRETARY
SEBELIUS WHO SAID SHE WAS
UNCOMFORTABLE WITH TAKING OFF
THE AGE RESTRICTION BECAUSE OF
VERY YOUNG TEENAGERS AND BY VERY
YOUNG SHE SAID THERE WASN'T
ENOUGH INFORMATION ON PERHAPS
THE 13- AND 14-YEAR-OLDS.
SHE WAS IMMEDIATELY BACKED UP BY
THE PRESIDENT WHO, REMEMBER, HAS
AND I THINK THERE WAS CONCERN
ABOUT THOSE VERY YOUNG TEENS.
SO I'M NOT SURPRISED THAT BOTH
THE PRESIDENT AND PRESUMABLY
SECRETARY SEBELIUS, WHO WE
HAVEN'T HEARD FROM, WOULD BE
COMFORTABLE WITH 15 AND UP.
NOW, THE CONCERN THAT WOMEN'S
HEALTH GROUPS HAVE ABOUT THIS IS
THESE 15- AND 16-YEAR-OLDS, WHO
THIS HAS NOW BEEN EXTENDED, TO A
LOT OF THEM WON'T HAVE I.D.
REMEMBER, THEY'RE MOSTLY TOO
YOUNG TO DRIVE.
THEY CAN PRESENT A PASSPORT OR
BIRTH CERTIFICATE.
IT'S UNLIKELY THAT'S SOMETHING
THEY'LL BE WALKING AROUND WITH,
EITHER.
>> Brown: AS WE SAID, THIS HAS
BEEN POLITICALLY FOUGHT FAIR
LONG TIME, SO WHERE DOES THAT
LEAVE THE POLITICS RIGHT NOW?
WHO IS HAPPY AND WHO IS NOT
SNEAP IS ANYBODY HAPPY?
>> I DON'T THINK ANYBODY IS
HAPPY.
I THINK THE PEOPLE WHO REALLY
DIDN'T WANT THIS TO BE MADE MORE
AVAILABLE, SOME OF THE MORE
CONSERVATIVE CHRISTIAN GROUPS
DON'T LIKE IT AT ALL.
THE WOMEN'S HEALTH GROUPS WANT
ALL OF THE RESTRICTIONS REMOVED.
THE ADMINISTRATION SORT OF WANTS
NO PART OF THIS, AND, REMEMBER,
YOU'VE NOW GOT THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT REPRESENTING THE
F.D.A.
WE KNOW THE F.D.A.'S POSITION
WAS ORIGINALLY TO REMOVE ALL
RESTRICTIONS.
IT'S REALLY HARD TO KNOW WHO
WANTS WHAT RIGHT NOW?
>> Brown: AND WHAT DOES HAPPEN
NEXT?
>> WELL, THEY GO BEFORE THE
JUDGE.
THE JUDGE HAS JUST GIVEN A FEW
EXTRA DAYS TO ARGUE ABOUT
WHETHER OR NOT THEY'LL GET A
STAY IN THIS ORDER.
REMEMBER, THE JUDGE HAS ORDERED
THE FAD TO RIMOVE ALL
RESTRICTION, ORIGINALLY BY NEXT
MONDAY.
SO NOW THEY'RE GOING TO ARGUE
ABOUT WHETHER OR NOT THE JUDGE
WILL STAY THIS ORDER WHILE IT'S
BEING APPEALED GL IN THE
MEANTIME, THE USE OF THE MORNING
AFTER PILL, DO WE KNOW?
IS IT GROWING?
HAS IT STABILIZED?
>> THERE HAS BEEN SOME MORE USE,
BUT, AGAIN, THERE HAVE BEEN
THESE BARRIERS, AS I MENTIONED,
NOT JUST FOR YOUNGER WOMEN BUT
FOR OLDER WOMEN WHO HAVE HAD
TROUBLE GETTING IT BECAUSE IT'S
BEEN KEPT BEHIND THE PHARMACY
COUNTER AND THERE HAVEEEN B
DIFFICULTIES WITH IT.
>> Brown: ALL RIGHT JULIE
ROVNER OF NPR, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: AND WE TURN TO IRAQ
WHERE THE COUNTRY JUST HAD ITS
DEADLIEST MONTH IN NEARLY FIVE
YEARS.
RAY SUAREZ REPORTS ON THE RECENT
SURGE IN VIOLENCE AND WHAT'S
BEHIND IT.
>> Suarez: TWISTED WRECKAGE AND
SHATTERED GLASS STREWN ACROSS
CENTRAL IRAQ, THE AFTERMATH OF
ALL-TOO-FAMILIAR BOMBINGS.
FOUR COORDINATED ATTACKS MONDAY
IN FOUR SHIITE CITIES SOUTH OF
BAGHDAD KILLED MORE THAN 35
PEOPLE.
MULTIPLE ATTACKS YESTERDAY
KILLED 22 MORE.
>> (translated): DO ALLAH AND
PROPHET MOHAMMED ACCEPT THIS?
NO ONE IS SAFE.
YOU DO NOT KNOW IF YOU WILL COME
BACK TO A HOUSE OR NOT WHEN YOU
GO TO WORK!
>> Suarez: THE ATTACKS-- DOZENS
IN THE LAST MONTH-- ARE THE
MOST-SERIOUS SPASM OF VIOLENCE
SINCE AMERICAN TROOPS LEFT
NEARLY 18 MONTHS AGO.
TODAY, THE UNITED NATIONS
MISSION IN IRAQ SAID APRIL WAS
THE DEADLIEST MONTH SINCE JUNE,
2008: MORE THAN 700 PEOPLE WERE
KILLED, ALMOST ALL IN BAGHDAD.
COUPLED WITH THE SUNNI-SHIITE
BLOODLETTING IN NEIGHBORING
SYRIA, ALL THIS HAS REKINDLED
FEARS OF SECTARIAN WAR IN IRAQ.
YEARS OF SUCH VIOLENCE TORE THE
COUNTRY APART AFTER THE AMERICAN
INVASION, AND KILLED TENS OF
THOUSANDS.
>> (translated): THE
EXPLOSIONS HAVE ESCALATED
NOWADAYS IN THE SOUTH AND THE
MIDDLE OF THE COUNTRY,
ESPECIALLY SINCE HAWIJA EVENTS,
WHEN THE IRAQI TROOPS STORMED A
PROTEST SITE.
>> Suarez: THAT ATTACK IN HAWIJA
BY THE PREDOMINANTLY-SHIITE
SECURITY FORCES LAST WEEK
RESULTED IN 20 DEAD SUNNI
PROTESTERS.
THEY HAD SET UP CAMP ABOUT 100
MILES NOH OFRT BAGHDAD TO OPPOSE
WHAT THEY SAW AS THE
INCREASINGLY SECTARIAN BENT OF
SHIITE PRIME MINISTER NOURI AL-
MALIKI AND HIS GOVERNMENT.
A STRING OF BOMBINGS FOLLOWED
THE HAWIJA ATTACK.
SUNNI MILITANTS SKIRMISHED WITH
SECURITY FORCES AND THE TELL-
TALE CAR BOMBINGS OF AL QAIDA IN
IRAQ RAMPED UP.
BUT ANOTHER GROUP IS ALSO COMING
TO THE FORE.
THE MEN OF THE ARMY OF THE
NAQSHBANDIA ORDER, KNOWN BY ITS
ARABIC ACRONYM, J.R.T.N., IS A
SUFI-ISLAMIST MILITANT GROUP.
THE GROUP WAS FORMED AFTER
SADAM DHUSSEIN'S EXECUTION IN
LATE 2006.
ONE OF ITS STRONGHOLDS IS
HAWIJA.
J.R.T.N. IS ALLEGEDLY HEADED BY
THE HIGHEST-RANKING SADDAM AIDE
TO ELUDE CAPTURE: IZZAT IBRAHIM
AL-DOURI.
HE WAS THE KING OF CLUBS IN THE
U.S. MILITARY'S FAMOUS DECK OF
CARDS OF WANTED IRAQIS.
LAST WEEK, PRIME MINISTER MALIKI
SOUGHT TO TAMP DOWN THE
SECTARIAN FERVOR, NOW RIFE IN
SYRIA, AND AGAIN THREATENING
IRAQ.
>> (translated): I CAN
HONESTLY SAY THAT IF THE
SECTARIAN SEDITION BURSTS THERE
WILL NOT BE A WINNER OR A LOSER,
ALL OF US WILL BE LOSERS WHETHER
THOSE WHO ARE IN THE SOUTH OR IN
THE NORTH, IN THE EAST OR WEST
OF THE COUNTRY.
LET THOSE WHO FOMENT
SECTARIANISM, WHETHER THEY ARE
FROM INSIDE OR OUTSIDE THE
COUNTRY, BE READY TO BURN
THEMSELVES OF THE FIRE SECTARIAN
STRIFE.
>> Suarez: ON MONDAY IRAQ'S
MEDIA COMMISSION TOOK WHAT IT
SAID WAS A STEP TO END THAT
STRIFE: IT SUSPENDED LICENSES
FOR TEN SATELLITE CHANNELS.
>> (translated): WE HAD DIRECT
MEETINGS WITH THE CHANNELS'
ADMINTRATISIONS AND WE ASKED
THEM TO CHANGE THEIR LANGUAGE.
TAKING A STAND AGAINST THOSE WHO
CALL FOR VIOLENCE, SECTARIAN
STRIFE AND SECTARIAN KILLING.
THEY WERE CALLING FOR DIRECT
KILLING RECENTLY, SO THIS IS
INCONSISTENT WITH THE NORMS AND
STANDARDS ADOPTED BY FREE PRESS
IN MOST DEMOCRACIES.
>> Suarez: MOST WERE SUNNI-
AFFILIATED OPERATIONS.
THE COMMISSION IS POWERLESS,
HOWEVER, TO STOP BROADCASTS
ALTOGETHER.
>> Sz:WE GET TWO VIEWS.
RYAN CROCKER WAS U.S. AMBASSADOR
TO IRAQ FROM 2007 TO 2009 AND IS
NOW A DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR AT
THE MILLER CENTER AT THE
UNIVERSITY OF VIRGINIA.
AND FEISAL ISTRABADI IS THE
DIRECTOR OF THE CENTER FOR THE
STUDY OF THE MIDDLE EAST AT THE
SCHOOL OF GLOBAL AND
INTERNATIONAL STUDIES AT INDIANA
UNIVERSITY.
HE ALSO SERVED AS IRAQ'S DEPUTY
AMBASSADOR TO THE UNITED NATIONS
FROM 2004 TO 2007.
AMBASSADOR, LET'S START WITH
YOU, HOW DO YOU EXPLAIN THE
RECENT UPSURGE IN VIOLENCE IN
IRAQ?
>> WELL, OF COURSE, THE-- IT IS
AN UPSURGE.
THAT'S AN IMPORTANT WORD.
THAT IS TO SAY, THERE HAS BEEN
AN ONGOING DEGREE OF VIOLENCE
FOR SOME TIME SORT OF
PERCOLATING ALONG.
I THINK A NUMBER OF THINGS HAVE
OCCURRED.
I THINK THAT THE MALIKI
GOVERNMENT-- NURI MALIKI HIMSELF
HAS BEEN ASSERTING GREATER AND
GREATER CONTROL OVER THE
INSTRUMENTALITIES OF THE STATE.
AND I THINK-- AND HAS BEEN
UNABLE OR UNWILLING TO ENTER OR
EXECUTE THE COMP PROMISES THAT
GENERAL PETRAEUS HAD WORKED OUT
AT THE TIME OF THE AMERICAN
TROOP SURGE, AND THESE CHICKENS
HAVE SORT OF COME HOME TO ROOST
AT THIS POINT, AND THE
DISSATISFACTION HAS JUST BOILED
OVER, I THINK.
>> Suarez: AMBASSADOR CROCKER,
IS THAT HOW IT LOOKS TO YOU, AN
INCREASINGLY CONTROLLING PRIME
MINISTER IS WHAT IS BRINGING ON
ALL THIS NEW VIOLENCE?
>> I THINK FEISAL IS RIGHT, RAY.
IT'S A VERY COMPLEX SITUATION,
OBVIOUSLY.
THERE IS AN IRAQI DOMESTIC
SECTARIAN ELEMENT WITH IRAQ
SUNNIS UNHAPPY OVER ACTIONS
TAKEN AGAINST PROMINENT SUNNI
POLITICIANS, MOST RECENTLY
CHARGES AGAINST THE HIGHLY
REGARDED MINISTER OF FINANCE, AS
WELL AS THE DECISION TO POSTPONE
PROVINCIAL ELECTIONS IN TWO
PREDOMINANTLY SUNNI PROVINCES.
BUT THERE'S ANOTHER ELEMENT AS
WELL THAT IS CAPTURED IN YOUR
CLIP.
AL QAEDA IN IRAQ IS VERY MUCH ON
THE OFFENSIVE, AND THEY HAVE
COMBINED WITH SYRIAN AL QAEDA,
IN A TRULY HORRIFIC ALLIANCE.
SO THESE ATTACKS FROM AL QAEDA,
OF COURSE, PLAY INTO AN INCREASE
IN SECTARIAN TENSION THAT
ERUPTED IN VIOLENCE IN HAWIJA,
AS YOU POINTED OUT, ON APRIL 23.
I THINK IT IS A TIME WHEN THE
PRIME MINISTER WHO WE JUST HEARD
CALL FOR STEPS TO STOP SECTARIAN
TENSIONS AND OTHER IRAQI
POLITICIANS TO TAKE A DEEP
BREATH, CONSIDER ALL THAT
THEY'VE ACHIEVED, AND NOT RISK
LOSING IT NOW.
>> Suarez:AM, DO YOU SEE SOME
OF THE SYRIAN CONFLICT SPILLING
OVER INTO IRAQ?
>> I HAVE NO DOUBT THAT RYAN IS
RIGHT ABOUT THAT, BUT I HAVE TO
SAY, THAT WE HAVE BEEN-- THAT
THE SECTARIAN VIOLENCE, AGAIN,
NEVER TRULY SUBSIDED IN IRAQ.
THERE'S ALWAYS BEEN AN
UNDERCURRENT OF IT, AND I DON'T
BELIEVE MYSELF THAT THE SYRIAN
CRISIS IS FANNING THE FLAMES IN
IRAQ AS SUCH.
RATHER, WITH THESE SORTS OF
ALLIANCES OF CONVENIENCE THAT
RYAN JUST MENTIONED, WHAT YOU
HAVE IS PERHAPS IF YOU'RE A
SUNNI TRIBAL SHEIKH, YOU MIGHT
LOOK THE OTHER WAY WHEN YOU SEE
AN AL QAEDA OPERATIVE OR AN
AL QAEDA CELEBRATING IF YOU
BELIEVE THAT YOU HAVE BEEN SORT
OF PERMANENTLY DISENFRANCHISED
FROM THE CURRENT POLITY.
WHILE I THINK IT'S CONTRIBUTING
TO IT, I DON'T THINK IT'S A
CAUSATIVE FACTOR.
I MIGHT ALSO SAY PART OF THE
PARALYSIS OF THE MALIKI
GOVERNMENT NMY VIEW, IS AS THEY
SEE WHAT SEEMED, AT LEAST, THE
SORT OF A SHIA GOVERNMENT
FALLING IN SIRRIA, HE WAS, I
THINK, MALIKI, WAS CONCERNED
THAT THAT WOULD BE A PRECEDENT
IN IRAQ AND THAT THAT HAS MADE
HIM MORE INTRANSIGENT IN TERMS
OF MAKING A POLITICAL SETTLEMENT
OF THE ISSUES.
>> Suarez: AMBASSADOR CROCKER
YOU HAVE CALLED THIS RECENT
SITUATION REMINISCENT OF THE
DAYS IN 2006 THAT LED TO VIRTUAL
CIVIL WAR IN IRAQ.
IS IRAQ SLIDING TOWARDS CIVIL
WAR TODAY?
>> I DON'T THINK IRAQ IS AT THAT
POINT, BUT I DO THINK THE
CAUTION HAS TO BE SOUNDED.
THE VIOLENCE IN HAWIJA, WHEN
PREDOMINANTLY SHIA SECURITY
FORCES ATTACKED A SUNNI PROTEST
ENCAMPMENT, AND KILLED 20
PEOPLE, IS A VERY DANGEROUS
SIGN.
AND I THINK IT SHOULD BE THE
SIGNAL FOR IRAQIS OF ALL SECTS
AND ETHNICITIES TO TAKE A VERY
DEEP BREATH, TO RECOGNIZE THAT
THEY COULD SLIDE BACK INTO
CHRONIC SECTARIAN VIOLENCE, THAT
THEY AND WE WORKED SO HARD TO
PUT AN END TO.
THE TENSIONS ARE NOT NEW, AS
FEISAL KNOWS.
BUT WHAT IS IMPORTANT IS THAT
THEY BE RESOLVED AND WORKED
THROUGH IN A CONTEXT OF
NEGOTIATION, OF PEACEFUL
ENDEAVOR.
AND I THINK THE PRIME MINISTER'S
CALL THAT YOU JUST PUBLICIZED
FOR AN END TOW SECTARIANISM IS
AN IMPORTANT STEP IN THAT
DIRECTION.
I THINK WHAT SPOKESPERSONS FOR
ISOLA SISTANI AFTER PRAYERS WILL
BE IMPORTANT.
GL AMBASSADOR ISTRABADI, THE
U.S. HAS BASICALLY LEFT THE
COUNTRY, UNABLE TO NEGOTIATE A
REMAINING FORCE WITH THE
GOVERNMENT IN BAGHDAD.
DOES THE UNITED STATES STILL
HAVE ANY LEVERAGE THERE, ANY
INFLUENCE?
>> WELL, THE UNITED STATES STILL
HAS, I THINK, TREMENDOUS
LEVERAGE AND TREMENDOUS
INFLUENCE.
IRAQ IS NOT THE ONLY COUNTRY EYE
DON'T THINK THERE'S A COUNTRY IN
THE WORLD THAT THE UNITED STATES
DOESN'T HAVE INFLUENCE OVER TO
SOME DEGREE, INCLUDING A PLACE
LIKE NORTH KOREA, LET ALONE
IRAQ.
IT HAS TREMENDOUS INFLUENCE
THERE.
THE IRAQIS WANT TO BUY AMERICAN
ARMS.
THE IRAQIS WANT TO HAVE GOOD
COMMERCIAL RELATIONS WITH THE
UNITED STATES.
THEY WANT TO HAVE AMERICAN
COMPANIES INVEST IN IRAQ.
AT SOME POINT, IRAQ WILL WANT
WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
MEMBERSHIP.
THERE WERE TREMENDOUS LEVERS AT
THE DISPOSAL OF THE UNITED
STATES.
THEY MAY NOT QUITE BE WHAT THEY
WERE WHEN AMBASSADOR CROCKER WAS
IN BAGHDAD AND THERE WERE
150,000 TROOPPEDZ, BUT THERE ARE
STILL 11ERS THAT CAN AND SHOULD
BE USED BY THE ADMINISTRATION TO
TRY TO EXTRICATE IRAQ FROM WHAT
APPEARS A DESCENT INTO ANOTHER
ROUND OF CHAOS.
>> Suarez: AMBASSADOR CROCK
EYOU YOU NOT ONLY NUDE
INFLUENCE.
YOU NEED THE GOVERNMENT THAT HAS
THE CREDIBILITY, JUICE, THE
POWER TO DEESCALATE THE CURRENT
VIOLENCE AND BRING STABILITY TO
THE COUNTRY.
DOES THE AL-MALIKI GOVERNMENT
HAVE THAT?
>> WE'VE SEEN A PATTERN THAT WAS
VERY PRESENT DURING MY TIME
THERE THAT GIVEN THE STILL
EMBRYONIC DEVELOPMENT OF A NEW
OPEN POLITICAL SYSTEM IN IRAQ,
IRAQIS SOMETIMES FIND IT
DIFFICULT TO MAKE COMPROMISES
DIRECTLY WITH EACH OTHER.
THEY CAN DO IT THROUGH A
MEDIATOR, AND WE PLAYED THAT
ROLE MANY, MANY TIMES DURING MY
TIME IN BAGHDAD.
I THINK, AS FEISAL SUGGESTS, WE
NEED TO DO IT AGAIN.
WE DO HAVE INFLUENCE, PRECISELY
FOR THE REASONS HE STATED.
WE NEED TO USE IT.
AND I THINK WITH THE NEW TEAM IN
THE ADMINISTRATION, PARTICULARLY
SECRETARY KERRY, AS SECRETARY OF
STATE, SECRETARY HAGEL AS
SECRETARY OF DEFENSE, TWO
COMMITTED INTERNATIONALISTS, WE
HAVE THE PEOPLE WHO COULD HAVE A
REAL IMPACT.
THE INFLUENCE IS THERE.
WE NEED TO USE IT.
>> Suarez: WELL, YOU GENTLEMEN
WILL BE KEEPING AN EYE ON THE
SITUATION AS WE WILL HERE.
AMBASSADORS  CROCK, AND FEISAL
ISTRABADI, THANK YOU GENTLEMEN
BOTH.
>> Woodruff: NOW, WHAT A HIGH-
TECH FUTURE MAY MEAN FOR YOUR
STANDARD OF LIVING, PERSONAL
PRIVACY AND HOW GOVERNMENTS DEAL
WITH THEIR CITIZENRY.
A BIG SUBJECT, TO BE SURE.
BUT THOSE VISIONS ARE THE FOCUS
OF A BOOK CALLED "THE NEW
DIGITAL AGE" BY ERIC SCHMIDT,
THE EXECUTIVE CHAIRMAN OF GOOGLE
AND HIS CO-AUTHOR, JARED COHEN,
WHO RECENTLY WORKED AT THE STATE
DEPARTMENT.
HE'S NOW AT GOOGLE AS WELL.
I SAT DOWN WITH THEM IN
WASHINGTON RECENTLY.
ERIC SCHMIDT, JARED COHEN,
WELCOME TO THE "NEWSHOUR."
>> THANK YOU FOR HAVING US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Woodruff: SO YOU DESCRIBE
IN THE BACK, CONNECTIST,
TECHNOLOGY AS A FORCE FOR GOOD,
SOMETHING THAT'S GOING TO
IMPROVE THE QUALITY OF HUMAN
LIFE.
HOW CAN YOU BE SO SURE?
>> YOU KNOW, WE'RE GOING FROM A
TIME WHEN PEOPLE HAD ALMOST NO
INFORMATION TO THE WHOLE WORLD
BEING FULLY INTERCONNECTED WITH
ALL THE WORLD'S INFORMATION
AVAILABLE TO ANOTHER 5 BILLION
PEOPLE WHO ARE JOINING US.
THAT MEANS THEY'LL SOLVE T
MEDICAL PROBLEMS, THEIR HEALTH
PROBLEMS, OBVIOUSLY, ECONOMIC
PROBLEMS.
IT WILL MAKE THE WORLD SAFER.
IT WILL HELP OUR EXPORTS AND
GLOBALIZATION GOING ON AROUND
US, BUT THERE ARE ISSUES.
BUT OVERWHELMINGLY, IT'S A GOOD
THING.
>> IF YOU THINK 57% OF THE
WORLD'S POPULATION LIVES UNDER
SOME KIND OF AN AUTOCRACY.
THOSE 57% OF THE WORLD'S
POPULATION IN THE FUTURE WILL
HAVE MORE CHOICES, MORE OPTIONS.
THEY'LL BE ABLE TO BE WITNESSES
WITH SMIR SMARTPHONES IN THE
FACE OF ATROCITY.
THEY'LL BE MORE EMPOWERED THAN
ANY OTHER TIME IN HUMAN HISTORY.
AS ERIC MENTIONED THA THAT IS NT
NECESSARILY A SILVER BULLET
ANSWER TO THE WORLD'S PROBLEMS
BUT IT IS AN IMPORTANT CHANGE
THAT WILL TAKE PLACE.
>> Woodruff: AT THE SAME TIME,
OF COURSE, THERE IS THE DARK
SIDE AND YOU SPENT A LOT OF TIME
WRITING ABOUT IT.
WE HAVE BEEN FORCEFULLY REMINDED
OF IT WITH WHAT HAPPENED TO
BOSTON.
TWO YOUNG MEN WHO THANKS TO THE
WEB, TO THE SPIRNT, WERE ABLE TO
NOT VOANL THEIR IDEOLOGY
CONVERTED BUT ALSO TO GET
INFORMATION ON HOW TO MAKE
BOMBS.
WHAT ABOUT THAT SIDE?
>> MY QUESTION, OF COURSE, IS
HOW MANY FLOTS PLOTS WERE FOILED
BEFORE THAT OFFING OTHERS WHOSE
ACTIVITIES WERE SEEN BY THE
POLICE BEFORE THEY DID SOMETHING
TERRIBLE?
AND, INDEED, THE PROBLEM OF THE
LONE YOUNG MAN HAS BEEN
RADICALIZED IS NOT A FULLY
SOLVED ONE.
WITH THIS TECHNOLOGY WE CAN
DETECT THIS KIND OF BEHAVIOR.
WE CAN GIVE THESE PEOPLE CHOICES
AND I BELIEVE THERE WILL BE
FEWER SUCH ATTACKS AS A RESULT.
WE WILL FOIL MORE OF THEM IN THE
FUTURE.
THANK GOD THE BON
SUCH A GOOD JOB.
>> Woodruff: YOU MEAN BY
FINDING THEM AHEAD OF TIME?
>> FINDING THEM AHEAD OF TIME
BIKER SEEING WHAT THEY'RE DOING.
IT'S VERY, VERY DIFFICULT TO DO
THE KINDS OF THINGS THESE PEOPLE
WERE TRYING TO DO-- AND
ULTIMATELY SUCCESSFUL-- WITHOUT
LEAVING A DIGITAL TRACK.
>> Woodruff: BUT YOU STILL
HAVE JARED COHEN, THESE
TERRORIST, JIHADIST WEB SITES
WHICH ARE SO EASILY AVAILABLE.
THEY'RE NOW PROLIFERATING WE'RE
TOLD, W BY THE THOUSANDS OUT
THERE.
>> I LIKE TO COMPARE AND
CONTRAST THIS WITH BACK ALLEYS
WHERE THE SLUMS OF RIYADH WHERE
THERE'S NO OPPORTUNITY FOR A
COUNTER-NARRATIVE TO EMERGE.
WHERE THERE'S NO VISIBILITY INTO
WHERE RADICALIZATION IS TAKING
PLACE.
IF PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO
RADICALIZE AT-RISK YOUNG PEOPLE
YOU WOULD MUCH PREFER THEM DOING
IT OUT IN THE OPEN WHERE IT CAN
BE CHALLENGED, WHERE IT CAN BE
SEEN BY EVERYBODY FROM LAW
ENFORCEMENT TO JUST CITIZENS
THAT OPPOSE IT.
AND THE DIVERSITY OF OPINION
CNTZ BE ESCAPED, EVEN IN THE
MOST RADICALIZED ENVIRONMENTS
WHEN THE ENTIRE WORLD IS ONLINE.
>> odruWoff: MEANWHILE, ERIC
SCHMIDT, YOU HAVE REPRESSIVE
GOVERNMENTS WHO LOOK AT ALL THIS
FREEFLOWING INFORMATION, PEOPLE
FEELING EMPOWERED, AND THEY SEE
IT AS A THREAT.
WHETHER IT'S A COUNTRY LIKE
CHINA OR NORTH KOREA OR ANY
OTHER NUMBER OF COUNTRIES WHERE
LEADERS WANT TO KEEP CONTROL
OVER WHAT'S GOING ON THERE THEIR
COUNTRY.
>> YOU KNOW, THIS SHIFT-- THE
SHIFT HAS A BIAS, AND THAT BIAS
IS AN EMPOWERMENT BIAS.
IT EMPOWERS THE CITIZEN OF A
COUNTRY.
AND A SORT OF ROUGH BALANCE
EMERGES IN A DEMOCRACY WHERE THE
MORE EMPOWERED CITIZENS HAVE A
BETTER SEAU WHAT THE GOVERNMENT
ISOIN DG.
THE GOVERNMENT CHANGES ITS
POLICIES AND SO FORTH.
BUT IN AUTHORITARIAN
GOVERNMENTS, ONE WHICH IS NOT
HELD ACCOUNTABLE BY ITS
CITIZENS, THE CITIZENS JUST GET
MORE UNHAPPY.
THEIR EXPECTATIONS GET HIGHER.
THEY KNOW MORE ABOUT THE
CORRUPTION, AS THEY DEFINE IT,
ITHAT GOES ON IN THEIR
GOVERNMENT, AND IT BECOMES AING
SIGNIFICANT THREAT TO THESE
GOVERNMENTS.
THEY WILL TRY TO BLOCK THE
INTERNET.
THEY WILL TRY TO SLOW IT DOWN.
INDEED, 35 COUNTRIES NOW ARE
BLOCKING GOOGLE IN ONE FORM OR
ANOTHER AND IT'S A CONSTANT
PROBLEM FOR US, AND I'M SURE FOR
OTHER INTERNET COMPANIES.
>> Woodruff: AND PARTICULARLY,
IN A COUNTRY LIKE CHINA, WHERE
YOU HAVE OVER 2 BILLION PEOPLE,
A GOVERNMENT DETERMINED TO KEEP
CONTROL OF THE INFORMATION.
NOT ONLY THAT, THERE'S ALL THE
CYBER SPYING GOING OSNOOPING
INTO WHAT WESTERN GOVERNMENTS
AND BUSINESSES ARE DOING.
WHERE DO YOU SEE THAT HEADED?
>> WELL, IT'S FORTUNATE
UNDERSTAND THERE ARE THREE
THINGS CHINA IS REALLY DOING
RIGHT NOW.
THEY'RE STEALING INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY.
THEY'RE RESTRICTING THE CIVIL
LIBERTIES OF THEIR POPULATION.
BUT INTICIALLY THEY'RE ALSO
TESTING THE WATERS TO SEE WHAT
THEY CAN GET AWAY WITH IN TERMS
OF NEFARIOUS CYBER ATTACKS.
THERE IS A LARGER POINT HERE.
CHINA IS CERTAINLY NOT THE ONLY
COUNTRY DOING THIS, BUT THE VAST
MAJORITY OF THE WORLD'S
TECHNOLOGICAL INFRASTRUCTURE HAS
NOT YET BEEN BUILT AND FOR
STATES COMING ONLINE, MANY OF
WHICH ARE AUTOCRATIC, THEY CAN
BUILD IT BASED ON OPEN
PRINCIPLES OR CLOSED AND
AUTOCRATIC PRINCIPLES.
THERE ARE ONLY SO MANY COUNTRIES
WHOSE COMPANIES CAN BUILD THAT
INFRASTRUCTURE.
WE HAVE TO MAKE SURE THE REST OF
THE WORLD COMES ONLINE WITH
TECHNOLOGY CONDUCIVE TO THE FREE
FLOW OF INFORMATION.
OTHERWISE IT IS GOING TO BE
DIFFICULT, AND THE AUTOCRATS
WILL HAVE AN EXTRA EDGE.
>> IN THE SITUATION WHERE THE
INTERNET IS BALKANIZED IS ONE
WHICH DOES NOT SERVE THE
INTERESTS OF THE UNITED STATES,
DOES NOT SERVE THE CITIZENS OF
THE WORLD.
IT MAY SERVE THE GOVERNMENTS,
BUT IT ULTIMATELY MEANS LESS
INFORMATION, LESS FREEDOM, LESS
MARKS, LESS TRADE, LEASE
INNOVATION.
>> Woodruff: LET'S BROADEN
THIS OUT AND TALK ABOUT
INDIVIDUALS AS THEY'RE AFFECTED
BY THIS BRAVE NEW WORLD IN A
HYPERCONNECTED INTERNET
TECHNOLOGY.
ERIC SCHMIDT, IS THERE EVEN
GOING TO BE SUCH A THING AS
PRIVACY?
>> OF COURSE THERE IS.
PRIVACY BECOMES MORE IMPORTANT
IN THIS NEW INTERCONNECTED
WORLD.
WE NEED PRIVACY.
EVERYONE WANTS IT, AND I THINK
YOU HAVE TO FIGHT FOR IT.
IT WILL BE IMPORTANT TO SAY I
WANT MY PRIVACY.
I DON'T WANT THE GOVERNMENT
SNOOPING ON ME FOR THIS REASON
OR THAT.
I'M NOT AS WORRIED ABOUT THE
MATURE WESTERN COUNTRIES WHICH
HAVE A HISTORY OF PRIVACY
LEGISLATION.
I'M VERY WORRIED-- WE TALK A LOT
ABOUT THIS IN THE BOOK-- ABOUT
COUNTRIES THAT DON'T HAVE A
HISTORY OF PRIVACY OR INDIVIDUAL
RIGHTS.
IN A COUNTRY THAT IS SORT OF A
POLICE STATION, THE NOTION OF
PERSONAL PRIVACY, SORT OF A
FOREIGN CONCEPT.
WHEN THEY GET ALL CONNECTED THE
THE GOVERNMENTS WILL PUT IN
SNOOPING SOFTWARE, THEY'LL TRACK
EVERYBODY UNDER THE GUISE OF
POLICE WITHOUT ANY CIVIL
LIBERTIES PROTECTIONS.
>> Woodruff: IN TERMS OF HERE
IN THE UNITED STATES, YOU
ALREADY SEE A GENERATIONAL
DIVIDE, DON'T YOU, ON THIS
QUESTION OF PRIVACY?
>> IT'S INTERESTING THAT YOU
MENTION GENERATIONAL.
YOU HAVE ONE AUTHOR WHO IS A
PARENT, AND THE OTHER WHO IS
MAYBE AN ASPIRING PARENT, SO
ONE.
THINGS WE'VE DONE IN THE 30-PLUS
COUNTRIES WE'VE TRAVELED TO IN
THIS BOOK IS TALK TO A LOT OF
PARENT ABOUT THIS ISSUE OF
ONLINE PRIVACY AND SECURITY AND
WHETHER YOU'RE IN THE UNITED
STATES, ASIA, OR AFRICA, PARENTS
ARE BISHOPING THAT THEIR
CHILDREN ARE COMING ONLINE
EARLIER AND FASTER THAN EVER
BEFORE.
AND OUR LOGIC IS WHEN IT COMES
TO PROTECTING PRIVACY AND
SECURITY, YOU HAVE TO START
YOUNGER AND YOUNGER.
PARENTS NEED TO LITERALLY TALK
TO THEIR KIDS ABOUT THE
IMPORTANCE OF ONLINE PRIVACY AND
SECURITY YEARS BEFORE THEY EVEN
TALK TO THEM ABOUT THE BIRDS AND
THE BEES.
>> Woodruff: WHAT ABOUT-- AND
THIS IS KIND OF CONNECT TED TO
THIS, ERIC, IS THE LOSS OF HUMAN
CONTACT.
THE MORE WE DO EVERYTHING IN
FRONT OF A SCREEN OR IN FRONT OF
A HANDHELD DEVICE, A SMARTPHONE,
THE LESS PERSON-TO-PERSON
CONNECTION THERE IS.
HOW MUCH DOES THAT QUERY YOU?
>> SO, THIS WAS AN ISSUE WHEN
THE TELEPHONE CAME OUT.
IF YOU GO BACK TO THE HISTORY OF
COMMUNICATIONS, EVERYONE HAS HAD
THIS CONCERN.
AND YET HUMANITY HAS FLOURISHED
DURING THIS PERIOD.
IT LOOKS TO US LIKE THE
CONNECTIST, THESE DEVICES AND SO
FORTH AMPLIFY HUMAN
COMMUNICATION.
THEY ALLOW YOU TO GET MORE
THINGS DONE.
BUT WE DON'T SEE PEOPLE SPENDING
LESS TIME WITH THEIR LOVED ONES
AS A RESULT.
THEY MAY SHARE IT WITH THE
DISTRACTIONS THAT ARE GOING ON,
BUT THERE'S AN "OFF" BUTTON FOR
THAT.
>> Woodruff: WHAT IS YOUR
MESSAGE TO FOLKS OUT THERE, SOME
VERY COMFORTABLE WITH
TECHNOLOGY, OTHERS LITERALLY
FRIGHTENED OF IT, FEEL THEY ARE
WAY BEHIND WHEN IT COMES TO
UNDERSTANDING WHERE WE ARE?
>> THE GOOD NEWS IS THAT IN MY
PROFESSIONAL CAREER, COMPUTERS
HAVE GONE FROM BEING ESSENTIALLY
IMPOSSIBLE TO USE TO BEING VERY,
VERY USEFUL AT MANY, MANY TASKS.
YOU THINK ABOUT THE EASE OF USE
WITH WHICH YOU CAN WATCH A
VOORKS ANSWER A QUESTION, SORT
OF NAVIGATE.
THE NEW MOBILE PHONES AND
TABLETS ARE SO MUCH BETTER THAN
ANYTHING THAT PRECEDED THEM, AND
THAT'S GOING TO CONTINUE.
EVENTUALLY, THESE DEVISE WILL
BECOME VERY GOOD AT
ANTICIPATING-- THIS IS, AGAIN,
WITH YOUR PERMISSION IT'S THINGS
YOU CARE ABOUT.
YOU'LL CARRY THEM AROUND.
THEY'LL MAKE INTERESTINGSUGGEST.
THEY'LL BECOME YOUR BEST DIGITAL
FRIEND AND MAKE YOUR LIFE
BETTER.
>> Woodruff: ERIC SCHMIDT
JARED COHEN, THANK YOU VERY
>> Woodruff: YOU CAN WATCH MORE
OF OUR CONVERSATION ONLINE.
WHILE YOU'RE THERE, LEAVE YOUR
ESTQUIONS FOR ERIC SCHMIDT AND
JARED COHEN.
I'LL BE TALKING TO THEM AGAIN IN
A GOOGLE HANGOUT.
DETAILS WILL BE ON OUR WEBSITE.
>> Brown: FINALLY TONIGHT, A
GRIZZLY ADDITION TO EARLY
AMERICAN HISTORY.
FOUNDED IN 1607, JAMTOWNES WAS
AMERICA'S FIRST PERMANENT
ENGLISH SETTLEMENT.
THE VIRGINIA COMPANY OF LONDON
ESTABLISHED THE COLONY 60 MILES
NORTH OF THE MTH OF THE
CHESAPEAKE BAY, NAMING THE SITE
"JAMES FORT" AFTER ENGLAND'S
KING JAMES THE FIRST.
BUT LIFE THERE WAS ANYTHING BUT
EASY.
HISTORIANS BELIEVE THE SETTLERS
ARRIVED DURING THE WORST DROUGHT
IN 800 YEARS.
AND DISEASE, STARVATION, AND
CONFLICTS WITH NEARBY NATIVE
AMERICANS PLAGUED THE COLONISTS.
ACCOUNTS FROM THE TIME TELL OF
RESIDENTS FORCED TO EAT DOGS,
CATS, RODENTS, AND EVEN SHOE
LEATHER TO FEND OFF STARVATION.
AND, IT APPEARS, IT WAS EVEN
WORSE THAN THAT: RESEARCHERS
HAVE NOW REVEALED EVIDENCE OF
CANNIBALISM.
IN THE REMAINS OF A 14-YEAR-OLD
GIRL FOUND IN A TRASH PIT AT THE
COLONY SITE LAST SUMMER.
FORENSIC ANTHROPOLOGIST DOUGLAS
OWSLEY SAYS CUT MARKS ON THE
CHEEK BONES AND SKULL OF THE
GIRL THEY'VE NAMED JANE SUPPORT
THE THEORY SHE WAS BUTCHERED
AFTER HER DEATH FOR CONSUMPTION.
>> FROM MY EXPERIENCE WORKING
WITH PREHISTORIC SKELETONS WHERE
I HAVE SEEN POST-MORDEM MEANING
"AFTER DEATH" PROCESSING OF
REMAINS, THIS IS ABSOLUTELY
CONSISTENT WITH WHAT WE SEE WITH
CANNIBALISM AND THOSE TYPES OF
CASES.
>> Brown: HOW JANE DIED REMAINS
UNKNOWN, BUT RESEARCHERS SAY
THERE WAS NO EVIDENCE OF MURDER.
IN ALL SOME 80% OF THE COLONISTS
AND MEMBERS OF A RELIEF FLEET
SENT FROM ENGLAND DIED BEFORE
THE SITUATION STABILIZED IN
1610.
AND JOINING US NOW IS WILLIAM
KELSO, DIRECTOR OF ARCHEOLOGY AT
THE JAMESTOWN REDISCOVERY
PROJECT.
HE DIRECTED THE TEAM THAT
UNEARTHED THE YOUNG WOMAN'S
BONES AND IS AUTHOR OF THE BOOK,
"JAMESTOWN: THE BURIED TRUTH."
WELL, THANKS FOR JOINING US.
THERE HAVE BEEN WRITTEN ACCOUNTS
OF CANNIBALISM IN THE PAST,
RIGHT, SO IS THIS SOMETHING YOU
WERE SPECIFICALLY LOOKING FOR?
>> WELL, THERE ARE WRITTEN
ACCOUNTS.
THERE ARE ACTUALLY SIX, FROM SIX
DIFFERENT PEOPLE, BUT THEY'RE
ALL VERY ENIGMATIC, AND THEY'RE
HARD TO FOLLOW, AND I PERSONALLY
DIDN'T REALLY BELIEVE THAT THEY
WERE THAT TRUE BECAUSE I THOUGHT
THEY WERE MAKING POLITICAL
STATEMENTS BACK TO THE SPOBS ORG
VIRGINIA COMPANY TO SEND MORE
SUPPLIES.
BUT THE FACT THAT WE HAVE THOSE,
AND NOW WE HAVE THESSO THE
ARCHAEOLOGICAL CONTEXT WHERE WE
FOUND THESE REMAINS IN A LAYER
OF SOIL THAT WE CAN DATE TO WHAT
WAS CALLED THE STARVING TIME OF
1609, 1610.
>> Brown: AS TO THE EVIDENCE,
FILL IN THE PICTURE A LITTLE
MORE THAT LETS YOU KNOW IT IS
DEFINITELY CANNIBALISM?
WHAT ARE THE SIGNS THAT MAKE
THIS SO CLEAR CUT?
>> THE MARKS, THE CUTS THAT ARE
ON THE CRANIUM, THE SKULL, AND
THESE ARE THE THINGS THAT
DR. OWSLEY HAS POINTED OUT, ALL
ADD UP TO SOMEONE WOULDN'T MAKE
THESE MARKS UNLESS THEY WERE
REMOVING SOFT TISSUE AND THE
BRAIN FROM THE SKULL.
AND THERE ARE SCORES OFUT MARKSU
KNOW THE ONLY REASON THEY COULD
BE THERE IS TO REMOVE THE FLESH.
>> Brown: WE SAID WE DON'T
KNOW MUCH ABOUT-- WELL, WE DON'T
KNOW HOW THE YOUNG WOMAN DIED.
WHAT DO WE KNOW ABOUT HER?
WHAT CAN BE SAID?
>> WELL, WE DON'T KNOW HER NAME.
WE'VE NAMED HER JANE, AS IN JANE
DOE, TO GIVE HER SOME KIND OF
PERSONALITY, BUT WE DON'T KNOW
HER NAME BECAUSE THE SHIPS THAT
CAME IN 1609 THAT BROUGHT
SEVERAL WOMEN, THERE'S NOT A
LIST OF THEIR NAMES.
BUT WE CAN KNOW SOMETHING FROM
THE FACT THAT MOST OF THEM THAT
CAME WERE EITHER THE DAUGHTERS
OF GENTLEMEN OR WOULD BE MAID
SERVANTS SPHWHROW SO WHAT IS T
THE-- WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE
FOR YOU OF SOMETHING LIKE THIS
AS YOU'RE LOOKING AT THIS
LONG-TERM PROJECT OF TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT WHAT HAPPENED THERE?
IS THIS A BIG SURPRISE?
IS THIS A MAJOR STEP TO KNOW
SORT OF, I GUESS, HOW SERIOUS IT
WAS AT THAT TIME?
>> YES, THAT'S CERTAINLY TRUE.
AND IT HAD QUITE AN IMPACT ON
ME.
I THINK THAT ARCHAEOLOGISTS CAN
DEAL WITH MATERIAL CULTURE
ARTIFACTS AND GET SOME FEELING
FOR THE PEOPLE, BUT IT'S WHEN
YOU COME FACE TO FACE WITH
SOMETHING LIKE THIS, IN MY CASE,
I HAVE A MUCH MORE OF EMPATHY
FOR THE SITUATION THEY WERE IN,
AND THE FACT THAT JAMESTOWN CAME
SO CLOSE TO FAILING, AND I THINK
THE COURSE OF AMERICAN HISTORY
FROM THAT POINT ON, FROM THIS
THIS FIRST PERMANENT ENGLISH
SETTLEMENT WOULD HAVE BEEN QUITE
DIFFERENT HAD IT FAILED.
>> Brown: ARE WE STILL
LEARNING MORE ABOUT WHAT THAT
WINTER REALLY LIKE AND WHAT A
CLOSE CALL IT REALLY WAS?
>> ERE ARE THESE ACCOUNTS THAT
YOU CAN TAKE AS A GRAIN OF SALT
SOMETIMES, BUT NOW, I'M
CONVINCED.
THIS IS-- THIS HAPPENED.
AND TO BE REDUCED TO THAT LEVEL
OF STARVATION IS HARD FOR A
MODERN PERSON TO EVEN IMAGINE.
BUT I THINK NOW WE CAN BECAUSE
HERE IS CONCLUSIVE PROOF, I
FEEL, THAT THAT TOOK PLACE.
>> Brown: AND WHAT'S THE NEXT
STEP FOR YOU?
WHAT ARE YOU-- WHAT'S THE NEXT
THING THAT YOU'RE MOST CONCERNED
TO LOOK FOR?
>> WELL, WE ARE STILL EXCAVATING
IN A CELLAR ROOM THAT BECAME A
KITCHEN OR A BAKERY SITE DOWN
BELOW GROUND.
NOW, THAT LEVEL, THAT LAYER THAT
WAS-- THAT SOIL THAT JANE'S
REMAINS WERE FOUND IN, OF COURSE
THAT'S BEEN EXCAVATED.
BUT THEY'RE THE FLOOR LEVELS
WILL OF THE KITCHEN, AND WE JUST
STARTED YESTERDAY AND MORE TODAY
UNCOMPG THOSE LAYERS.
NOW, I DON'T EXPECT TO FIND MORE
OF THAT SITUATION BECAUSE THE
LAYERS ABOVE IS WHERE WE FOUND
IT.
BUT WE CAN LEARN A LOT ABOUT THE
STARVING TIME FROM WHAT WAS
THROWN AROUND IN THAT CELLAR,
AND IT'S QUITE A THICK LAYER.
AND THE SITE IS OPEN TO THE
PUBLIC.
THEY CAN SEE US DO THESE
EXCAVATIONS RIGHT UP FRONT AND
CLOSE.
SO WE'RE SHARING OUR MOMENT OF
DISCOVERY WITH THE PUBLIC AS WE
DO OUR RESEARCH.
>> Brown: ANOTHER WILLIAM
KELSO ON THE ARCHAEOLOGICAL
DISCOVERIES AT JAMESTOWN.
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> THANK YOU, JEFF.
>> Wooduff: AGAIN, THE MAJOR
DEVELOPMENTS OF THE DAY:
PRESIDENT OBAMA VISITED MEXICO
TO PROMOTE JOBS, TRADE AND
IMMIGRATION REFORM.
APRIL WAS THE BLOODIEST MONTH IN
IRAQ IN ALMOST FIVE YEARS, WITH
MORE THAN 700 PEOPLE KILLED IN
BOMB ATTACKS AND OTHER VIOLENCE.
AND A FAST-MOVING WILDFIRE
>> THE BHODY OF THE BOSTON
MARATHON BOMBING SUSPECT CD TAM
HAS BEEN CLAIMED.
A FUNERAL
>> Brown: ONLINE, A CAMPAIGN TO
GET AMERICANS USED TO HEARING
THE WORDS "MADAM PRESIDENT."
KWAME HOLMAN EXPLAINS.
>> Holman: THE PROGRESSIVE
WOMEN'S GROUP EMILY'S LIST
UNVEILED AN EFFORT TO HELP ELECT
THE FIRST FEMALE PRESIDENT OF
THE UNITED STATES IN 2016.
WE TAKE A LOOK AT POLLING AND
SOME POTENTIAL CONTENDERS.
AND AMONG PRESIDENTIAL
CANDIDATES OF THE LAST THREE
DECADES, WHO STILL CARRIES
CAMPAIGN DEBT?
WE LOOK AT A NEW REPORT FROM THE
CENTER FOR PUBLIC INTEGRITY.
SOME STATES ARE CONSIDERING A
ALL THAT AND MORE IS ON OUR
WEBSITE newshour.pbs.org.
JEFF?
>> Brown: AND THAT'S THE
"NEWSHOUR" FOR TONIGHT.
I'M JEFFREY BROWN.
>> Wooduff: AND I'M JUDY
WOODRUFF.
WE'LL SEE YOU ONLINE AND AGAIN
HERE TOMORROW EVENING WIARK
SHIELDS AND MICHAEL GERSON,
AMONG OTHERS.
THANK YOU AND GOOD NIGHT.